QUARKUS-177 DOC: Using simplified Hibernate ORM with Panache (#1)
emmurphy1/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/hibernate-orm-panache.adoc

////

> This guide is maintained in the main {ProductName} repository

Reviewer: this seems wrong. it is always in the man Quarkus repository - does not change based product name.

Author: Reverted back to Quarkus because this comment will not be included in product documentation. However, you should know that we always use variables for product names so that if the name changes it is an easy update. Also, if the name differs between community and enterprise, which at the moment, the short form of the name does not.

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Using simplified Hibernate ORM with Panache

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:config-file: application.properties
//:COMM:
:ENT:

> As a Java developer, you can use Hibernate ORM with Panache to simplify persistence with your {ProductName} applications.

Reviewer 2: I feel like `As a Java developer` is a bit redundant because Quarkus ATM is aimed at Java devs, so we can assume that's the sort of person we're talking about.

Author: This is the form we use with product stories so that the user knows the target audience.

Reviewer 2: So perhaps we should make this conditional on product? Project users will know Quarkus is for Java devs.

Author: OK

endif::ENT[]

ifdef::COMM[]
* For information about creating a {ProductName} Maven project, see https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling[_Quarkus - Building Applications with Maven_].
endif::COMM[]

* For information about configuring your {ProductName} Maven project with a JDBC datasource, see https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource[_Quarkus - Configuring your datasources_].
* For information about configuring your {ProductName} Maven project Hibernate ORM, see https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm[_Quarkus - Quarkus - Hibernate ORM and JPA_].

For an example of a completed {ProductName} Maven project that uses the Panache extension, see the https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts/tree/master/hibernate-orm-panache-quickstart[Hibernate ORM Panache Quickstart].

== Hibernate ORM

//adapted from https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.0/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html. Module will be reused in Hibernate ORM story.

> Coupling Java object-oriented software projects with relational databases for data persistence can be cumbersome and time-consuming. Development costs are significantly higher due to a paradigm mismatch between how data is represented in objects versus relational databases. Hibernate is an Object/Relational Mapping (ORM) solution for Java environments that facilitates mapping data to and from an object model representation to a relational data model representation. It is an implementation of the Java Persistence API (JPA).

Reviewer 2: Do we really have to explain Hibernate ORM in this guide? We have the Hibernate ORM guide itself that we can point to, for those who don't know it, no?

Author: I'll leave this to Nicole and Vidya to decide.

Reviewer 3: Do we have that guide on the customer portal?  I don't think we do at this time so I say we should have this here.  Also, repetition isn't always a bad thing if it stops folks from having to go to multiple places for the information they need.

Reviewer 2: I think that guide will also have to be there because the Hibernate ORM extension is productised.

Author: Removed and preserved in a separate hibernate-con.adoc file o the section can be used in the Hibernate story.

Hibernate not only takes care of the mapping from Java classes to database tables and from Java data types to SQL data types, but also provides data query and retrieval facilities. It can significantly reduce development time otherwise spent with manual data handling in SQL and Java database connectivity (JDBC). Hibernate’s design goal is to relieve you of most common data persistence-related programming tasks by eliminating the need for manual data processing using SQL and JDBC.

The JPA `@entity` annotation is at the heart of Hibernate ORM. When applied to a Java class, it maps the class to a specific database table. The fields in the class map to database columns. Each instance of the class represents a database row.

== Hibernate ORM with the {ProductName} Panache JPA extension

Hibernate ORM is the most widely used JPA implementation. It provides all of the features of an ORM. However, for a simple implementation with the most common data mappings you can use the {ProductName} Panache JPA extension to write more concise code.

The Hibernate ORM with Panache extension contains the following classes:

> * `PanacheEntity`

Reviewer 2: I feel like this list of types is not very useful to people reading the guide, and might scare people away from keeping on reading, especially compared to the previous intro which went straight to the point with a short example that would instantly hook any existing ORM user and entice them into reading.

Author: I'll leave this to Nicole and Vidya to comment.

Reviewer 3: I'm okay removing them if it's not helpful to the customer and will only cause confusion.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it's not useful.

Author: It's a short list and the reason I included it is so that when we refer to PanacheEntity and PanacheEntityBase there is context for the reader.

However, I have now removed it.

* `PanacheEntityBase`
* `PanacheQuery`
* `PanacheRepository`
* `PanacheRepositoryBase`
* `PanacheEntity`

> The {ProductName} Panache JPA extension eliminates the following Hiberante ORM issues:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {ProductName} Panache JPA extension eliminates the following Hibernate ORM issues:
```

> The {ProductName} Panache JPA extension eliminates the following Hiberante ORM issues:

Reviewer 2: I like how you've moved the "How and why we simplify Hibernate ORM mappings" section from penultimate to near first.

Author: :-)

* *Useless `getter` and `setter` functions*
+
Because Java does not support properties, when you write Java code you must create fields and then generate `getter` and `setter` functions for those fields, even if all you need to do is read or write to the field. With Panache, if you define a field as a public field and then read or write to that field, Panache generates the required `getter` and `setter` functions. In addition, you can write other accessors as required.
* *Entity definitions split from operations*
+
In the traditional Java EE model, you put the the entity definition in one class, the model, and the operations performed on the model in another class, the data access object (DAO) or repository. The Panache active record method enables you to create the entity definition and the repository in the same class.

* *Verbose Hibernate queries*
+
Panache provides Hibernate Query Language (HQL) shortcuts to simplify your queries. You do not write parts of the query that you do not need.

> 

Reviewer 2: We probably miss what was ill-explained in the source guide as `Hibernate is very general-purpose, but does not make it trivial to do trivial operations that make up 90% of our model usage` which actually refers to the number of predefined methods such as find/list/delete etc that we provide. This is an important point, even though it was previously not properly explained (in the current guide), which is probably why you omitted it.

OK  I added some to the intro para in this section. However, 'trivial' is jargon so I didn't use it. Sorry for editing your comment. For some reason I cannot add new comments :-)

* *Verbose Hibernate queries*
+
Panache provides Hibernate Query Language (HQL) shortcuts to simplify your queries. You do not write parts of the query that you do not need.

=== Using the Panache active record pattern

When you use Hiberate ORM, you must create two classes that separate the state and its operations even though you would never do that for regular Java objects where state and methods are in the same class. In addition to requiring two classes, Hibernate ORM requires you to  inject the repository where you need to perform entity operations, which breaks your edit flow and requires you to get out of the code that you are  writing to set up an injection point before coming back to use it.

You can use the Panache active record pattern with the `PanacheEntity` class to keep the model and the repository together.

.Procedure.

. Add the Panache JPA extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:
+
[source,java]
----
<dependencies>
    <!-- Hibernate ORM specific dependencies -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-hibernate-orm-panache</artifactId>
    </dependency>

>     <!-- JDBC driver dependencies -->

Reviewer 2: If you don't define a JDBC driver it won't work.

Author: The prerequisites for this guide, stated at the top:
 You have a Quarkus Maven project configured with a Java database connectivy (JDBC) datasource and Hibernate ORM. If they have a Quarkus Maven project that is configured with JDBC won't they have this code or similar in the pom.xml already?

    <!-- JDBC driver dependencies -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-jdbc-postgresql</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>

Reviewer 2: Technically it's true, except I think that info is much more handy to duplicate here because users can cut and paste the whole thing.

Author: The problem with that is the example that is in the Panache guide is specific to Postgre. So to make it general takes a lot of explaining and anyway, the example is only useful is the user uses postgre. If I were to include it, I would have to provide a general template then the specific postgre example.

Reviewer 3: Would it work if we just put in a warning that "if you don't define a jbdc driver things won't work" in addition to the prereq? I don't want to be repeating prereq information in the procedure.

Great idea, Nicole. I have done that.

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-jdbc-postgresql</artifactId>
    </dependency>

> </dependencies>

Reviewer 2: If we show the opening tag, we should show the close tag too, no?

Author: Right! Fixed in two places.

----

Then add the relevant configuration properties in `{config-file}`.

[source,properties]
+
. To define an entity, create a class that extends the `PanacheEntity` class, annotate it with `@Entity`, and add your
columns as public fields. The following example creates and annotates the `Person` class:
+
[source,java]
----

> # configure your datasource

Reviewer 2: Why don't we show configuration? Without it nothing will work.

Author: It is a prerequisite that they have the data source configured before they start this guide. Is there something to Panache about the configuration?

Reviewer 2: It's not, but again, that's a very handy thing to have here. Much more important than the intro about Hibernate that you added, IMO.

Reviewer 3: I think that by pointing the customer to the prereqs we have covered this for them. We don't want to be repeating information if there is a better way to support the customer.

Reviewer 2: OK

> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Author: I think I fixed the correct instance but I don't see it reflected here. Would you check the rendered doc please.

    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;

    public static Person findByName(String name){
        return find("name", name).firstResult();
    }

    public static List<Person> findAlive(){
        return list("status", Status.Alive);
    }

    public static void deleteStefs(){
        delete("name", "Stef");
    }
}
----

=== Using the Panache repository pattern
Panache enables you to create entities that contain the model and repository in a single class. However, if you prefer to create a separate class for the model and a separate class for the repository and still have the other benefits of Panache, for example having the `getters` and `setter` automatically generate, you can use the repository pattern.

.Procedure.

. Add the Panache JPA extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:
+
[source,java]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-hibernate-orm-panache</artifactId>

>     </dependency>

Reviewer 2: Same remark about JDBC and the closing tag.

+
[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class PersonRepository implements PanacheRepository<Person> {

   public Person findByName(String name){
       return find("name", name).firstResult();
   }

   public List<Person> findAlive(){
       return list("status", Status.Alive);
   }

   public void deleteStefs(){
       delete("name", "Stef");
  }
}
----

+
. Add the following code to the REST endpoint where you want to use entity operations so that the operations that are defined in `PanacheEntityBase` are available:
+
[source,java]
----
@Inject
PersonRepository personRepository;

@GET
public long count(){
    return personRepository.count();
}
----

=== Pananche common operations
This section lists common operations that you can use with your entity or repository. The active record pattern examples use a `Person` entity created from the `PanacheEntity` class. The repository pattern examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` created from the
`PanacheRepository` class.

* Create a record (active record pattern and repository pattern):
+
[source,java]
----
Person person = new Person();

> person.name = "Stef";

Reviewer 2: Actually for the Active-Record pattern you need to call the setters here.

Author: Oh. Can you tell me what to add for the active-record pattern. As you might have noticed, I combined the active-record and repository method lists. But in the source both have the same example for creating a person.

Reviewer 2: You've split it now, which is fine. But the repository pattern usage samples need to call the setters now if the entity doesn't extend `PanacheEntity`. So `person.setName("Stef")` instead of `person.name = "Stef"`, and similarly for all fields.

OK. I changed to;
Person person = new Person();
person.setName = "Stef";
person.setBirth = LocalDate.of(1910, Month.FEBRUARY, 1);
person.setStatus = Status.Alive;

Note that is not how it is in the source so please check if I missed any.

person.birth = LocalDate.of(1910, Month.FEBRUARY, 1);
person.status = Status.Alive;
----

* Persist an entity:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----

> person.persist(person);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
person.persist();
```

----

> ** Repository pattern:

Reviewer 2: I feel that listing those operations together distracts the viewer into viewing two methods of achieving the same things _after_ they've (hopefully) made up their mind about why style they prefer, and so it stops reading like an acceptably short usage sample and turns into a mind-numbing long list, no?

Author: OK. Separated.

Reviewer 2: Thanks.

+
[source,java]
----
personRepository.persist(person);
----
+
NOTE: After an entity is persisted, you do not need to explicitly save your entity. All changes are automatically persisted on transaction commit.

* Verify that an entity is persisted:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----

> if(person.isPersistent(person))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if(person.isPersistent())
```

----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
if(personRepository.isPersistent(person))
----

* Delete an entity:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----

> person.delete(person);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
person.delete();
```

----

** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
personRepository.delete(person);
----

* Retrieve a list of all `Person` entities:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----

> List<Person> allPersons = person.listAll();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List<Person> allPersons = Person.listAll();
```

Generall the case difference between `person` and `Person` is meaningful, so you should review all those samples to keep them correct: `person` is the instance, and `person.foo()` is an instance method call (a call on that particular object), while `Person` is the class and `Person.foo()` is a static method (a call that does not target a particular instance).

----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
personRepository.delete("status", Status.Alive);
----

* Delete all persons:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
person.deleteAll();
----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
personRepository.deleteAll();
----

* Delete by ID:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
boolean deleted = person.deleteById(personId);
----
** repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
boolean deleted = personRepository.deleteById(personId);
----

* Set the name of all living persons to Mortal:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
person.update("name = 'Mortal' where status = ?1", Status.Alive);
----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
personRepository.update("name = 'Mortal' where status = ?1", Status.Alive);
----

All `List` methods have equivalent `stream` methods, which requires a transaction to work as shown in the following example:

[source,java]
----
Stream<Person> persons = personRepository.streamAll();
List<String> namesButEmmanuels = persons
    .map(p -> p.name.toLowerCase() )
    .filter( n -> ! "emmanuel".equals(n) )
    .collect(Collectors.toList());
----

== Hibernate ORM with Panache queries

> Hibernate Query Language (HQL) is a query language similar to Structured Query Language (SQL). However, HQL works with persistent objects and properties instead of tables and columns. For more information about HQL, see the "HQL and JPQL" section of the xref:https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/5.4/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html[_Hibernate ORM User Guide_].

Reviewer 2: I feel like this belongs closer to where we define "Simplified Hibernate ORM with Panache queries" below, no? This seems randomly placed.

Author: This is an introduction section for the whole query subject. For the order, I followed the order in the source. So now I've moved 'Simplified' to below the intro.

Reviewer 2: OK fine, good move, thanks.

=== PanacheQuery entity

The `PanacheQuery` entity  abstracts the use of paging, getting the number of results, and operating on `List` or `Stream` methods. You can use the `PanacheQuery` entity  for paging and range-based queries.

> Only use `List` and `Stream` methods if your table contains small data sets. For large data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only use `list` and `stream` methods if your table contains small data sets. For large data
```

We're talking about the method names here, not their return type.

> sets, use the `Find` method equivalents, which return a `PanacheQuery` on which you can perform paging.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sets, use the `find` method equivalents, which return a `PanacheQuery` on which you can perform paging.
```

[WARNING]
====
You cannot mix ranges and pages. If your query uses a range, any methods that depend on having a current page throw an `UnsupportedOperationException` exception. To switch back to paging, use `page(Page)` or `page(int, int)`.
====

.Additional resources
* For a complete list of  `PanacheQuery` methods, see the https://javadoc.io/doc/io.quarkus/quarkus-hibernate-orm-panache/latest/io/quarkus/hibernate/orm/panache/PanacheQuery.html[_PanacheQuery Class_] page.

==== Examples of queries that use paging
These examples show how you can use paging in your Panache queries. The active record pattern examples use a `Person` entity created from the `PanacheEntity` class. The repository pattern examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` created from the
`PanacheRepository` class.

* Create a query for all living persons:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
PanacheQuery<Person> livingPersons = Person.find("status", Status.Alive);
----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----

> PanacheQuery<PersonRepository> livingPersons = Person.find("status", Status.Alive);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PanacheQuery<Person> livingPersons = personRepository.find("status", Status.Alive);
```

And similarly for subsequent repository examples.

----

* Make pages have 25 entries per page:
+
[source,java]
----
livingPersons.page(Page.ofSize(25));
----

* Retrieve the first page:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
List<Person> firstPage = livingPersons.list();
----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----

> List<Person.Repository> firstPage = livingPersons.list();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List<Person> firstPage = livingPersons.list();
```

Here the two styles are equivalent: once you have a `PanacheQuery` its usage doesn't differ between the two styles: they only differ in how you obtain the `PanacheQuery` in the first place.

----
List<PersonRepository> firstRange = livingPersons.list();
----

* Specify a new range called `secondRange` with the range index 25 to index 49 (inclusive):
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
List<Person> secondRange = livingPersons.range(25, 49).list();
----

** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
List<PersonRepository> secondRange = livingPersons.range(25, 49).list();
----

=== Simplified Hibernate ORM with Panache queries
You can use HQL to write queries for Hibernate ORM with Panache entities, as shown in the following example:

[source,java]
----
Order.find("select distinct o from Order o left join fetch o.lineItems");
Order.update("update from Person set name = 'Mortal' where status = ?", Status.Alive);
----

However, Hibernate ORM with Panache provides several HQL short cuts.

.FROM
In most cases, HQL `SELECT` statements are immediately followed by the `FROM` clause, for example `SELECT name FROM _ENTITY_NAME_`, where `_ENTITY_NAME_` is the name of a Java entity. However, if you do not include `FROM` in your HQL `SELECT` statement, Panache adds `FROM` in the following cases:

[cols="30%,70%" options="header"]

|===
h|User entry
h|Expanded entry

> |`ORDER BY`

Reviewer 2: I feel like the original `…` which is missing here gave some context that the query had to start with this, and what followed would end up in the resulting HQL translation. Here it looks like the entire query should be just those two tokens, which is wrong.

Author: Updated the headings.

+
In the traditional Java EE model, you put the the entity definition in one class, the model, and the operations performed on the model in another class, the data access object (DAO) or repository. The Panache active record method enables you to create the entity definition and the repository in the same class.

* *Verbose Hibernate queries*
+
Panache provides Hibernate Query Language (HQL) shortcuts to simplify your queries. You do not write parts of the query that you do not need.

=== Using the Panache active record pattern

When you use Hiberate ORM, you must create two classes that separate the state and its operations even though you would never do that for regular Java objects where state and methods are in the same class. In addition to requiring two classes, Hibernate ORM requires you to  inject the repository where you need to perform entity operations, which breaks your edit flow and requires you to get out of the code that you are  writing to set up an injection point before coming back to use it.

You can use the Panache active record pattern with the `PanacheEntity` class to keep the model and the repository together.

.Procedure

> . Add the Panache JPA extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Add the Hibernate ORM with Panache extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:
```

+
NOTE: If you not define a JDBC driver, Hibernate ORM with Panache will not work.

ifdef::ENT[]
* For information about creating a {ProductName} Maven project, see https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us///red_hat_build_of_quarkus/{ProductVersion}/html-single/creating_quarkus_applications_with_apache_maven/[_Creating Quarkus applications with Apache Maven_].
endif::ENT[]

ifdef::COMM[]
* For information about creating a {ProductName} Maven project, see https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling[_Quarkus - Building Applications with Maven_].
endif::COMM[]

* For information about configuring your {ProductName} Maven project with a JDBC datasource, see https://quarkus.io/guides/datasource[_Quarkus - Configuring your datasources_].
* For information about configuring your {ProductName} Maven project Hibernate ORM, see https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm[_Quarkus - Quarkus - Hibernate ORM and JPA_].

For an example of a completed {ProductName} Maven project that uses the Panache extension, see the https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts/tree/master/hibernate-orm-panache-quickstart[Hibernate ORM Panache Quickstart].

> == Hibernate ORM with the {ProductName} Panache JPA extension

Reviewer 2: I've seen this "{ProductName} Panache JPA extension" term used in a number of places. The correct name of this extension is "Hibernate ORM with Panache", could you replace it everywhere please? I'm aware that the original document may not have been consistent about this, probably because a number of people have edited it over the years and the name of the extension changed early on too, but it's a fine occasion to fix this.

EM: Changed in three places.

.Procedure

. Add the Panache JPA extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:
+
[source,java]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-hibernate-orm-panache</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

+
. To define an entity, create a class that extends the `PanacheEntity` class, annotate it with `@Entity`, and add your
columns as public fields. The following example creates and annotates the `Person` class:
+
[source,java]
----
@Entity
public class Person extends PanacheEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;
    public Status status;
}
----
+
. Optional: To specify that a field not persist, use the `@Transient` annotation. The following example annotates the `status` field with `@Transient`.
+
[source,java]
----
@Entity
public class Person extends PanacheEntity {
    public String name;
    public LocalDate birth;

    @Transient
    public Status status;
}
----
. Add any additional accessors. The following example adds an accessor that returns `name` as uppercase in the model and an accessor that stores all names in lowercase in the database.

> //COMMENT: Is there a different between 'in the model' and 'in the database'?

Reviewer 2: Yes, the model refers to the Java representation, while the DB is where we store this externally.

----

* Delete by ID:
+
[source,java]
----
boolean deleted = person.deleteById(personId);
----

* Set the name of all living persons to Mortal:
+
[source,java]
----
person.update("name = 'Mortal' where status = ?1", Status.Alive);
----

All `List` methods have equivalent `stream` methods, which requires a transaction to work as shown in the following example:

[source,java]
----
Stream<Person> persons = personRepository.streamAll();
List<String> namesButEmmanuels = persons
    .map(p -> p.name.toLowerCase() )
    .filter( n -> ! "emmanuel".equals(n) )
    .collect(Collectors.toList());
----

=== Using the Panache repository pattern
Panache enables you to create entities that contain the model and repository in a single class. However, if you prefer to create a separate class for the model and a separate class for the repository and still have the other benefits of Panache, for example having the `getters` and `setter` automatically generate, you can use the repository pattern.

.Procedure.

. Add the Panache JPA extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:
+
[source,java]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>

>         <artifactId>quarkus-hibernate-orm-panache</artifactId>

Reviewer 2: You're still missing a closing tag here.

| `UPDATE FROM _ENTITY_NAME_ set _SINGLE_COLUMN_NAME_ =?`

| `set? _QUERY_STRING_`, where  `_QUERY_STRING_`is a query string
| `UPDATE FROM _ENTITY_NAME_ set _QUERY_STRING_`

|===

=== PanacheQuery entity

The `PanacheQuery` entity  abstracts the use of paging, getting the number of results, and operating on `List` or `Stream` methods. You can use the `PanacheQuery` entity  for paging and range-based queries.

Only use `list` and `stream` methods if your table contains small data sets. For large data
sets, use the `find` method equivalents, which return a `PanacheQuery` on which you can perform paging.

[WARNING]
====
You cannot mix ranges and pages. If your query uses a range, any methods that depend on having a current page throw an `UnsupportedOperationException` exception. To switch back to paging, use `page(Page)` or `page(int, int)`.
====

.Additional resources
* For a complete list of  `PanacheQuery` methods, see the https://javadoc.io/doc/io.quarkus/quarkus-hibernate-orm-panache/latest/io/quarkus/hibernate/orm/panache/PanacheQuery.html[_PanacheQuery Class_] page.

==== Examples of queries that use paging

> These examples show how you can use paging in your Panache queries. The active record pattern examples use a `Person` entity created from the `PanacheEntity` class. The repository pattern examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` created from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These examples show how you can use paging in your Panache queries. The active record pattern examples use a `Person` entity which extends the `PanacheEntity` class. The repository pattern examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` class which extends the
```

List<Person> firstPage = livingPersons.list();
----

* Retrieve the second page:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
List<Person> secondPage = livingPersons.nextPage().list();
----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
List<PersonRepository> secondPage = livingPersons.nextPage().list();
----

* Retrieve page 7:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
List<Person> page7 = livingPersons.page(Page.of(7, 25)).list();
----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
List<PersonRepository> page7 = livingPersons.page(Page.of(7, 25)).list();
----

* Retrieve the number of pages:
+
[source,java]
----
int numberOfPages = livingPersons.pageCount();
----

* Retrieve the total number of entities returned by this query without paging:
[source,java]
----
int count = livingPersons.count();
----

* Chain methods together:
** Active record pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
return Person.find("status", Status.Alive)
   .page(Page.ofSize(25))
   .nextPage()
   .stream()
----
** Repository pattern:
+
[source,java]
----
return PersonRepository.find("status", Status.Alive)
   .page(Page.ofSize(25))
   .nextPage()
   .stream()
----

==== Examples of queries that use a range of values

> These examples show how you can use a range of values in your Panache queries. The active record pattern examples use a `Person` entity created from the `PanacheEntity` class. The repository pattern examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` created from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These examples show how you can use a range of values in your Panache queries. The active record pattern examples use a `Person` entity which extends the `PanacheEntity` class. The repository pattern examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` class which extends the
```

----

> === Pananche active record pattern common operations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Panache active record pattern common operations
```

> This section lists common Panache active record pattern operations. These examples use a `Person` entity created from the `PanacheEntity` class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section lists common Panache active record pattern operations. These examples use a `Person` entity which extends the `PanacheEntity` class.
```

> * Create a record:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Create an entity:
```

+
[source,java]
----
Person person = new Person();
person.name = "Stef";
person.birth = LocalDate.of(1910, Month.FEBRUARY, 1);
person.status = Status.Alive;
----

* Persist an entity:
+
[source,java]
----
person.persist();
----

+
NOTE: After an entity is persisted, you do not need to explicitly save your entity. All changes are automatically persisted on transaction commit.

* Verify that an entity is persisted:
+
[source,java]
----
if(person.isPersistent())
----

* Delete an entity:
+
[source,java]
----
person.delete();
----

* Retrieve a list of all `Person` entities:
+
[source,java]
----
List<Person> allPersons = Person.listAll();
----

* Find a specific person by ID:
+
[source,java]
----

> person = person.findById(personId);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
person = Person.findById(personId);
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

EM: Fixed.

----

* Find a specific person by ID using the `Optional` class:
+
[source,java]
----

> Optional<Person> optional = person.findByIdOptional(personId);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Optional<Person> optional = Person.findByIdOptional(personId);
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

person = optional.orElseThrow(() -> new NotFoundException());
----

* Find all living persons:
+
[source,java]
----

> List<Person> livingPersons = person.list("status", Status.Alive);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List<Person> livingPersons = Person.list("status", Status.Alive);
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

----

* Count all persons:
+
[source,java]
----

> long countAll = person.count();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
long countAll = Person.count();
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

----

* Count all living persons:
+
[source,java]
----

> long countAlive = person.count("status", Status.Alive);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
long countAlive = Person.count("status", Status.Alive);
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

----

* Delete all living persons:
+
[source,java]
----

> person.delete("status", Status.Alive);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Person.delete("status", Status.Alive);
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

----

* Delete all persons:
+
[source,java]
----

> person.deleteAll();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Person.deleteAll();
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

----

* Delete by ID:
+
[source,java]
----

> boolean deleted = person.deleteById(personId);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
boolean deleted = Person.deleteById(personId);
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

----

* Set the name of all living persons to Mortal:
+
[source,java]
----

> person.update("name = 'Mortal' where status = ?1", Status.Alive);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Person.update("name = 'Mortal' where status = ?1", Status.Alive);
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

----

All `List` methods have equivalent `stream` methods, which requires a transaction to work as shown in the following example:

[source,java]
----

> Stream<Person> persons = personRepository.streamAll();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stream<Person> persons = Person.streamAll();
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

EM: I have changed this and it now looks like 'original' text. So leaving open for you to confirm. Maybe in the HTML?

    .collect(Collectors.toList());
----

=== Using the Panache repository pattern
Panache enables you to create entities that contain the model and repository in a single class. However, if you prefer to create a separate class for the model and a separate class for the repository and still have the other benefits of Panache, for example having the `getters` and `setter` automatically generate, you can use the repository pattern.

.Procedure.

> . Add the Panache JPA extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Add the Hibernate ORM with Panache extension dependency to your {ProductName} project `pom.xml` file:
```

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-hibernate-orm-panache</artifactId>

>     </dependency>

Reviewer 2: This line is required.

[source,java]
----
Person person = new Person();

> person.setName = "Stef";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
person.setName("Stef");
```

> person.setBirth = LocalDate.of(1910, Month.FEBRUARY, 1);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
person.setBirth(LocalDate.of(1910, Month.FEBRUARY, 1));
```

> person.setStatus = Status.Alive;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
person.setStatus(Status.Alive);
```

}
----

> === Pananche repository pattern common operations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Panache repository pattern common operations
```

> This section lists common Panache repository pattern operations. These  examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` created from the `PanacheRepository` class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section lists common Panache repository pattern operations. These  examples use a regular JPA `Person` entity and the `PersonRepository` class which implements the `PanacheRepository` interface.
```

Reviewer 2: Still to be applied

> * Create a record:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Create an entity:
```

----

The `Sort` class has many methods for adding columns and specifying sort direction.

=== Query projection

You can perform query projection with the `project(Class)` method on the `PanacheQuery` object that is returned by the `find()` methods. You can use it to restrict which fields will be returned by the database. Hibernate uses data transfer object (DTO) projection and generates a `SELECT` clause with the attributes from the projection class. This is also called _dynamic instantiation_ or _constructor expression_. For more information, see "The SELECT clause" section of the
link:https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/current/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html[_Hibernate_User_Guide_].

The projection class must be a valid Java Bean and have a constructor that contains all of its attributes. This constructor will be used to instantiate the projection DTO instead of using the entity class. This must be the only constructor of the class.

The following example shows how to perform query projection:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.runtime.annotations.RegisterForReflection;

@RegisterForReflection
public class PersonName {

>     public final String name; // <2>

Reviewer 2: Looks like the `<2>` and `<3>` call-outs are missing here?

Author: I have the call out text in the main text. I have removed the call out reference from the example. Note that I have conditionalized the note about native executables.

NOTE: If you want to check optimistic locking failures, perform object validation right away, or get immediate feedback, you can force the flush operation by calling `entity.flush()` or use `entity.persistAndFlush()` to make it a single method call. This enables you to catch any `PersistenceException` errors that occur when JPA sends changes to the database. However, this method is not efficient and transactions must still be committed.

.Procedure

To create a transaction, add the `@Transactional` annotation to your method at application entry point boundaries such as REST endpoint controllers.

The following example demonstrates the use of the flush method to allow a specific action in case of a `PersistenceException` error:
[source,java]
----
@Transactional
public void create(Parameter parameter){
    try {
        //The following code uses the persistAndFlush() shorthand method on a Panache repository to persist to the database then flush the changes:
        return parameterRepository.persistAndFlush(parameter);
    }
    catch(PersistenceException pe){
        LOG.error("Unable to create the parameter", pe);

>         //The following code saves the data to disk in case of an error:

Reviewer 2: I don't think we use `The following code` in code comments generally, so this feels unnatural. Is it standard procedure in code comments from docs?

Author: Well, in general we try not to include comments in code. So this was a compromise. However, I have now moved the comments to the introductory text.

Reviewer 2: Interesting, because devs are encouraged and used to comments in the code to explain what's going on.

Sure. I changed the text to more like the original.

NOTE: If you want to check optimistic locking failures, perform object validation right away, or get immediate feedback, you can force the flush operation by calling `entity.flush()` or use `entity.persistAndFlush()` to make it a single method call. This enables you to catch any `PersistenceException` errors that occur when JPA sends changes to the database. However, this method is not efficient and transactions must still be committed.

.Procedure

To create a transaction, add the `@Transactional` annotation to your method at application entry point boundaries such as REST endpoint controllers.

The following example demonstrates the use of the flush method to allow a specific action in case of a `PersistenceException` error. This example uses the `persistAndFlush()` shorthand method on a Panache repository to persist to the database then flush the changes. The data is saved to disk in case of an error:
[source,java]
----
@Transactional
public void create(Parameter parameter){
    try {

> // Here the persistAndFlush() shorthand method is used on a Panache repository to persist to database then flush the changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Here the persistAndFlush() shorthand method is used on a Panache repository to persist to database then flush the changes.
```

@Transactional
public void create(Parameter parameter){
    try {

>     //Here the persistAndFlush() shorthand method is used on a Panache repository to persist to database then flush the changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Here the persistAndFlush() shorthand method is used on a Panache repository to persist to database then flush the changes.
```

        return parameterRepository.persistAndFlush(parameter);
    }
    catch(PersistenceException pe){
        LOG.error("Unable to create the parameter", pe);

>         //In case of error, the data is saved to disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // In case of error, the data is saved to disk.
```

To create a transaction, add the `@Transactional` annotation to your method at application entry point boundaries such as REST endpoint controllers.

> The following example demonstrates the use of the flush method to allow a specific action in case of a `PersistenceException` error. This example uses the `persistAndFlush()` shorthand method on a Panache repository to persist to the database then flush the changes. The data is saved to disk in case of an error: /

Reviewer 2: Is the last `/` intentional?

    @Transactional
    public Person findByNameForUpdate(String name){
        Person p = Person.find("name", name).withLock(LockModeType.PESSIMISTIC_WRITE).findOne();
        //Perform some action. The lock will be released when the transaction ends.
        return person;
    }

}
----

NOTE: Locks are released when the transaction ends, so the method that invokes the lock query must be annotated with the `@Transactional` annotation.

== Custom IDs

> One of the advantages of Panache is that IDs are set automatically in the `PanacheEntityBase` and  `PanacheEntityRepositoryBase` classes. You can specify your own ID strategy by extending the `PanacheEntityBase` or `PanacheEntityRepositoryBase` class, depending on the entity method you are using.

Reviewer 2: On the one hand, I feel like this sucked the fun out of the original sentence to make it look more producty, and I regret it. But on the other hand, I'm not sure we can justify using a COMM/ENT conditional just for tone everywhere :(

Author: I know what you are saying, and hey, everyone likes to have fun with language especially if it keeps people entertained and engaged. However, for product doc we have to be consistent, use parallel structure, not use slang or idioms, and be very careful with humor because it can be misinterpreted. "not everyone's up for" and "we have you covered" would probably trigger questions from the translators and some non-native speakers reading it in English might have trouble understanding.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I understand, and I don't see any easy way to avoid that.

    @Transactional
    public Person findByIdForUpdate(Long id){
        Person p = Person.findById(id, LockModeType.PESSIMISTIC_WRITE);

>         //Perform some action.The lock will be released when the transaction ends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Perform some action.The lock will be released when the transaction ends.
```

>         // Perform some action.The lock will be released when the transaction ends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Perform some action. The lock will be released when the transaction ends.
```

    @Transactional
    public Person findByNameForUpdate(String name){
        Person p = Person.find("name", name).withLock(LockModeType.PESSIMISTIC_WRITE).findOne();

>         //Perform some action. The lock will be released when the transaction ends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Perform some action. The lock will be released when the transaction ends.
```

    //...
}
----

> ====

Reviewer 2: empty section?

Reviewer 2: Ah no, it's the end of the note, sorry

> == Defining entities in external projects or JAR files

Reviewer 2: This has been substantially rewritten and shortened upstream.

Author: Do you mean in the Hibernate ORM with Panache guide? I expanded this section because I felt the very brief explanation in that guide was insufficient.

Reviewer 2: Yes, in the current Quarkus repo.

Reviewer 3: I agree with Emily here, we needed more information for our customers. Her expansion seems perfect.

Reviewer 2: What I mean is that upstream this section got rewritten entirely, check it out: https://quarkus.io/guides/hibernate-orm-panache#defining-entities-in-external-projects-or-jars

So I think your rewrite is no longer relevant. Sorry, this often happens with Quarkus because upstream moves fast.

EM: Ah! I see. I have restored and edited the original text

    //...
}
----
====

== Defining entities in external projects or JAR files

> Hibernate ORM with Panache relies on Java `bytecode` enhancements that are added to your entities at compile time. It attempts to identity archives with Panache entities and consumers of Panache entities by the presence of the `META-INF/panache-archive.marker` marker file . Panache includes an annotation processor that automatically creates this file in archives that depend on Panache, even if that dependency is indirect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hibernate ORM with Panache relies on Java `bytecode` enhancements that are added to your entities at compile time. It attempts to identity archives with Panache entities and consumers of Panache entities by the presence of the `META-INF/panache-archive.marker` marker file. Panache includes an annotation processor that automatically creates this file in archives that depend on Panache, even if that dependency is indirect.
```
